# Worker Collectives for Generative Justice

## Abstract

How do marginalized people self-organize? Generative Justice provides an outline
of self-empowerment for marginalized members of society, which has "vehicles."
_Consensus-based worker collectives_ are one such "vehicle" for Generative
Justice, providing _unalienable coownership_ of an organization.  However,
despite being a seemingly powerful "vehicle" for Generative Justice, worker
collectives remain a severely under-researched topic.  This article aims to
provide a platform which clarifies the terminology and concepts relevant to
worker cooperatives, but also to utilize anecdotes, as a founder of Hypatia
Software Organization, Slime Mom, and Hen Coop, in order to demonstrate how
consensus-based worker collectives are a feasible, effective model for
Generative Justice. I also include specific implementations of worker
collectives for Generative Justice.

## Disambiguation

["Generative Justice"](https://generativejustice.wikispaces.com/) can crudely be
defined as a member-owned cooperative formed to empower its marginalized
members. Here's a definition of Generative Justice from the [Generative Justice
Wiki](https://generativejustice.wikispaces.com/):

<blockquote> The universal right to generate unalienated value and directly
participate in its benefits; the rights of value generators to create their own
conditions of production; and the rights of communities of value generation to
nurture self-sustaining paths for its circulation.

<cite>—<a href="https://generativejustice.wikispaces.com/">Generative Justice
Wiki</a></cite> </blockquote>

Generative Justice is a concept compliant with many organizational models. With
this article I hope to impart my experiences with anarchist cooperatives
("worker collectives") in particular. I also submit my proposal for an anarchist
cooperative model for generative justice, based on aforesaid "experiences."

As a model for marginalized peoples' self-empowerment, consensus-based anarchist
cooperatives put both organizational ownership and governance in the hands of
those marginalized peoples. Ultimately, consensus-based anarchist cooperatives
allow every member to incorporate their voice into all decisions while receiving
just compensation and property, which marginalized people are often cheated out
of, or restricted from.

An organizational model which is governed by its members is an anarchy. That is,
anarchy is when the members of the organization cooperate through official means
to make authoritative decisions, in explicit omission of representatives.  Thus,
every member has equal control (governance) and property (revenue, assets,
etc.), whereby the combination is "ownership." The membership makes decisions
cooperatively, as governed by their bylaws. Said bylaws enforce compliant
behavior of individuals, but it also provides checks and balances for decisions
made within the organization itself.  Anarchy has a history of being utilized by
marginalized peoples, e.g, anarcha-feminism, as most agreeably explained here:

<blockquote> Anarcha-feminism [...] combines anarchism with feminism.  It
generally views patriarchy as a manifestation of involuntary coercive hierarchy,
that should be replaced by decentralized free association. Anarcha-feminists
believe that the struggle against patriarchy is an essential part of class
conflict and the anarchist struggle against the state.  In essence, the
philosophy sees anarchist struggle as a necessary component of feminist struggle
and vice versa. L. Susan Brown claims that, "as anarchism is a political
philosophy that opposes all relationships of power, it is inherently feminist."

<cite>— <a
href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anarcha-feminism">Anarcha-feminism,
Wikipedia</a></cite> </blockquote>

Anarchy proposes that members, collectively as a membership, are the best
authority of that membership.  That is to say, representation removes political
power from the group, where representatives increasingly disparage workers'
interests.  This is contrary to the Westernized democratic fear that the people
must be protected from themselves, i.e., "mob rule," or "the tyranny of the
majority." To quote Peter Kropotkin:

<blockquote> In the animal world we have seen that the vast majority of species
live in societies, and that they find in association the best arms for the
struggle for life: understood, of course, in its wide Darwinian sense – not as a
struggle for the sheer means of existence, but as a struggle against all natural
conditions unfavourable to the species.  The animal species[...] in which
individual struggle has been reduced to its narrowest limits[...] and the
practice of mutual aid has attained the greatest development[...] are invariably
the most numerous, the most prosperous, and the most open to further progress.
The mutual protection which is obtained in this case, the possibility of
attaining old age and of accumulating experience, the higher intellectual
development, and the further growth of sociable habits, secure the maintenance
of the species, its extension, and its further progressive evolution. The
unsociable species, on the contrary, are doomed to decay.

<cite>— Peter Kropotkin, Mutual Aid: A Factor of Evolution (1902),
Conclusion.</cite> </blockquote>

As there is an evolutionary advantage to cooperation for a species, in the
propsperity of its members, I believe that similar advantages are yielded when
applied to business, which I believe consensus-based anarchy best reflects.

Consensus is when proposals are both constructed and approved by all
participants of a discussion.  In contrast, unanimity is when everyone _agrees_
to a proposal, an agreement met via consent (without block) or by vote. However,
unanimity, like any other method besides consensus, fails to incorporate the
construction of the proposal by all participants. Consensus can be a ground-up
approach of crowdsourcing all efforts accompanies by maximal information
diffusal, while leaving room for formal proposals to be elaborated upon by such
a process.

However, consensus and anarchy are nothing new to business, "worker collectives"
are an established business model that have been using both consensus and
anarchy for years. "Collectives" are a subset of "cooperatives," collectives
differing from cooperatives in that collectives are a horizontal/flat heirarchy,
they lack any authority _beyond_ the membership itself.
[cultivate.coop](http://cultivate.coop) explains the difference between a
collective and traditional cooperative models:

<blockquote> In cooperatives with hierarchical management structures, every
member is also an owner (or every worker, in the case of worker cooperatives).
The Board of Directors is comprised of and elected by members, but is empowered
to make governance decisions on their behalf.  Where there are managers (who are
often either elected or hired and supervised by the Board) are empowered to make
operational (management) decisions.  However, many worker cooperatives
(especially the experience in the UK) do not have managers.

Collectives tend to strive to abolish hierarchy.  This means that all collective
members are equally empowered to participate directly in the governance and
management of the organization.  Some roles and decisions may be delegated, but
all members are equal co-managers.  Because all members are equally responsible
for the success or failure of the organization, there is often a rigorous intake
process before a newcomer is approved as a full collective member.
</blockquote>

Unfortunately, I haven't found a lot of information about "worker collectives"
specifically, but there's plenty information on "worker cooperatives."
Nonetheless, there's a really good set of example bylaws for a worker collective
created by a whopping paragraph of authors: ["Sample Bylaws for a Worker
Cooperative."](http://institute.coop/sites/default/files/SampleWorkerCooperativeBylaws.pdf)

However, a model of governance alone is insufficient, you must also have good
goals and people who believe in them! Crowdsource those believers for delicate
planning, insight to cement member protections and benefits, to establish
calculated checks and balances. In general the goals and their believers should
be the organization's guiding star.

## The Worker Collective Manual

I created the "Worker Collective Manual" hoping it serves as an
easy-to-understand example of worker collective operations. Its purpose is to
provide a means of experimenting with an cooperative model (i.e., a worker
collective), prior to establishing legally with _actual_ bylaws. "Worker
Collective Manual" is based upon ["Sample Bylaws for a Worker
Cooperative,"](http://institute.coop/sites/default/files/SampleWorkerCooperativeBylaws.pdf)
which was prepared by the Green Collar Communities Clinic (GC3) of the East Bay
Community Law Center (EBCLC) and by the Sustainable Economies Law Center (SELC)
based on Bylaws created by Tim Huet of Arizmendi Association of Cooperatives and
adapted by Jenny Kassan of K2 Law Group.

The "Worker Collective Manual" contains specific references to [the Hen Coop
cooperative](http://hencoop.org), as it is a proposal for said cooperative. The
manual will (hopefully) be reviewed and collaborated on during a meeting on
January 7, 2017.

**Here it is, the Worker Collective Manual**: [Hen Coop's Informal
Bylaws](https://docs.google.com/document/d/135TKE0kNR5kHmWpyZEKo8RlN4rh_3ib-jeCGdKqjLmk/edit?usp=sharing).

As a bonus, here's an earlier version I wrote, entitled "The Anarchist
Cooperative Manual," which is a concept for larger worker collectives, available
in two formats:

  * [Anarchist Cooperative Manual (??? Edition on Google
  * Docs)](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1c4MC0se1ZEo7U-sVYCyS9JDbQLPJ9dJsIa-pMwZgSxY/edit?usp=sharing)
  * [Anarchist Cooperative Manual (First Edition) PDF
  * download](anarchist-cooperative-manual-first-ed.pdf)

## Challenges

I've made many mistakes with cooperatives and this section elaborates on them,
the general hurdles anarchist cooperatives face. Among the biggest is not
utilizing community input as often as possible and not realizing my own
limitations. By consulting the community you make things easier on yourself,
tasks become more accomplishable, contributors feel a sense of ownership,
information is diffused, and the results are better. You'll be surprised what
people will take off your hands. Be sure to act as a shining example of a good
member. Explicitly adhere to the rules, don't cut corners, take things slowly.

Make sure members are never surprised about changes within the cooperative.
Again, take it slow and steady, make sure all members have a chance to
participate and revise, revise, revise! For example, even if all members
participating in a meeting decide to make drastic changes, try to avoid
implementing them suddenly and without further discussion, otherwise members can
feel lost or left out. There should be steps taken to ensure big changes are
made slowly, that people given plentiful chance to offer their input, and that
plans are announced routinely to the membership with due notice.

The biggest consistent failure I've made has been an unpreparedness handling
interpersonal conflict. The relationships between each member is the fabric of
the collective. Conflict has the probable potential to destroy the cooperative
in an instant. Thus, incident reporting and handling becomes crucial. There must
be official, discrete channels for reporting and resolving interpersonal issues.
Resolutions must be decided, documented, and signed off by at least one
accountable member entrusted to do so. Filling an incident report must be an
action highly accessible to all members. On the lighter side of interpersonal
member relationships, there are proactive measures which can be taken,
one-on-one activities like chess (chess club), or group activities like
celebrations of the membership's accomplishments (as a whole).

There's an inherent power or authority in any organization, as Jo Freeman
explains in "The Tyranny of Structurelessness," and that it is important to make
those powers accountable and transparent.  There are many ways in which I failed
to actually distribute ownership and control, so I often acted as a clandestine
authority. I also failed to constantly incorporate everyone's input at any and
every turn, which is so essential to accomplish member ownership and control,
and for them to recognize their governance and property in the cooperative, even
if it can be slower at times. It always starts slow, and that's ok.

A lack of goals, starting a group without a concrete mission and set of goals
creates an indefinite amount of directionlessness, to call back to what I said
earlier: your organization's health is its goals and the supporters who believe
in them.

Onboarding is very difficult, it is crucial, without a powerful onboarding
experience power/ownership may never leave your hands.  Onboarding is the
foundation of generativity, generativity the foundation of any anarchical
cooperative.  Without generativity an anarchy ceases to be, it is important that
operation information is diffused, else delapetaded power structures will
emerge. Generativity is defined by Wikipedia:

<blockquote> Generativity in essence describes a self-contained system from
which its user draws an independent ability to create, generate, or produce new
content unique to that system without additional help or input from the system's
original creators.

<cite>—<a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Generativity">"Generativity,"
Wikipedia</a></cite> </blockquote>

[Chronus' article, "Employee Onboarding Program
Strategies"](http://chronus.com/employee-onboarding-program-guide) breaks down
onboarding as a long term learning experience, which must be routinely
evaluated. There are short-term "transactional" onboarding features, such as
technology setup, incident reporting, and other immediate information. Then
there are the "relational" onboarding features, such as long term learning
(especially with mentoring), exploring a member's relevance to the cooperative,
in-house networking, and more. Chronus defines "relational onboarding" as:

<blockquote> This type of learning is not something that happens in a day, a
week, or even a month. It’s something that happens in small chunks, over time.

<cite>—<a href="http://chronus.com/employee-onboarding-program-guide">Chronus'
article, "Employee Onboarding Program Strategie"s</a></cite> </blockquote>

Offer chances to learn in small bits over time. Provide chances to be mentored
for on-the-job learning over an extended period, such as mentoring members on
participating in member meetings.  Of course, in a worker collective some
workers dont' want to learn about operations, depending on your cooperative that
can be okay! Just make sure that a path to understanding operations is
accessible to every member.

A lack of accountability/responsibility of actions decided as a membership was
another crucial flaw. Things were decided upon, but there was no action done to
execute it; it is crucial that all planning be met with equal accountability.

There are simpler problems with an anarchist cooperative as well, there's a
difficulty with sharing resources among members, especially members-only
materials (manuals, meeting minutes, calendar, etc.), time management during
meetings, legally distributing ownership/property/governance, etc. Often it
boils down to ownership, such as, who ultimately controls the...

  * ... calendar?  ... website/domain/server/etc?  ... documents (as with Google
  * Docs, etc.)?  ... email and other accounts?  ... money (most complicated of
  * all!)?

There's also a lot of legal headaches involved with empowering every member as
equal owners of the cooperative.

Finally, and why I wrote this article to begin with: there's a serious lack of
research and documentation regarding anarchist cooperatives, so even if you
wanted to go in prepared, much is left to your intuition.

## Triumphs

I'm proud to say that the cooperatives I've founded have established invaluable
friendships and connections for various members, including myself. Those
cooperatives genuinely empowered and were of great help to some marginalized
people. The cooperatives even received noteriety, [I talked about Hypatia
Software Organization at LibrePlanet
2016](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W3HswEh4vhM) and [Slime Mom at Transh4ck
#ibuild4](https://twitter.com/HackLoft/status/807010355910156288).  The
cooperatives consistently raised a good amount of money for operations, through
Patreon, FundClub, PayPal donations, etc.  Meeting minutes were always recorded,
and by a variety of people, and that those documents were made accessible to all
members. Now that I'm done bragging about my babies I'll move on to some more
reprodicible tips.

I often took an observer role in meetings to see how smoothly they'd run without
me.  Everyone did a wonderful job adhering to the rules and carrying out the
meetings, even instructing others on the rules. People were speaking their minds
and those voices were incorporated into the cooperative's decisions.

I really love the process of consensus, because it's a decision process that
feels like a natural and real dialog.  Concerns are more likely to be raised and
addressed. Also, we're wiser as a group and a diverse set of perspectives is
invaluable. Holding meetings which were mostly open discussion seemed most
rewarding to everyone. It was important to have an "empath" role, a person to
relay concerns of those who are unable to (for any reason) address the meeting
participants directly. It's important to put extra care into a delicate system
of blocking consensus.

Responsibilities are distributed by means of those who are willing to be held
accountable to membership meetings. This proccess can be automated by allowing
member meetings to enact _empowered committees_ which are held accountable by
the membership. For example, you may not want IT concerns to constantly bubble
up in member meetings, thus you could create an empowered IT committee to
officiate procedure and bylaws concerning that body of work, accompanied by
routine reports to the membership, by which all actions are repealable by the
membership.

Comment boxes are a great way of voicing anonymous concerns, especially if those
comments are presented during member meetings, for example, giving everyone the
link to the comment form responses (Google Forms is great!). Make sure everyone
has access to it!

When a communities' cohesion is strong enough, aid arrives naturally; I've
personally seen members buy laptops and other necessities for the less
financially fortunate members. Nonetheless, I strongly believe in providing at
least one great benefits program consisting of a percentage of cooperative
revenue, such as an emergency HRT medication coverage.

Also, the anarchist cooperative model has resonated with so many marginalized
people in a unique way I did not initially expect. I strongly believe there's
something important in this field yet to be explored and discovered, as it is so
woefully under-researched.

## Good Reads

  * https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polytely
  * https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Organizational_studies
  * https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Consensus_decision-making
  * http://cultivate.coop/wiki/Worker_Cooperatives
  * https://www.academia.edu/3092538/Engineering_Selves_Hiring_Into_a_Contested_Field_of_Education
